AD LUCILIUM EplsTLOEAE CVI. CXV 203

111 a way that will benefit our charaeta—ut cetera . . . ita
philosophiam: i.e. as we waste our other resources on idle luxury
(contr. living according to nature), so even our philosophy we
pervert to useless problems. —- non vitae sed scholae: datives of
purpose; a profound bit of educational philosophy.

EPISTULA CXV

On the need of genuineness in literature and life, and of an
independent estimate of the real values of things·; the delusive
nature of the ordinary objeets of human pursuit. The beauty of
holiness and the curse of mammon—worship.

1. circa . . . compositionem: on Seneca’s principles of literary
style, cf. Introd. p. xxvii. seq.— velut signes: may, as it were,
stamp them with the seal of experienee.

2. pusillis: with trifles. —— Magnus ille: the man whose soul is
above petty things.— comptulos iuvenes: dandies, carefully
yroomed; the diminutive is contelnptuous. — de capsula: as if Just
from the bandbor. — cultus animi: the dress ο] thouqlzt — aliquid
fracti: some. flaw in zt; another Ms. reading is ficti, something
artifieial.

3. animum . . . inspicere: to look into the so1d,· cf. ἓ 17.—
iustitia . . . prudentia: the four cardinal virtues.— in homine

. . humanitas: paradoxieally a rarum bonum,· the play on the
words is analogous to the familiar observation that common sense
tum ponderis gravitatisque: objeets of adderent, the subjects of
which are providencia and maynanimitas.

4. numinis occursu obstupefactus: in aeeordanee with the
familiar idea that the sight of a god is perilous for a human being,

'the sight· of this perfect holiness in a man inspires tho same awe.

— ‘fas sit vidisse’: apparently quoted from one of two incom-
plete anonyinous poenis of the time of Nero, now known, from
the Ms. in which they are preserved, as the Einsiedeln poenis.
The line (Ι. 26) 15 Fas mihi sit vidisse. deos, fas prodere mundo
(Baehrens, Poet. Lat. Minores, iii. p. 61).—— benignitate produc-
tus: ie. drawn on by the look of kindness.— adoret, supplicet,
emittat: like resistat and precetur, with nonne, conclusions to the

